foreign
[Music] I'm Norman Walberger I've been introducing
something of a new point of view towards
arithmetic, fundamental arithmetic using the mset
approach, where we consider data collections which
are unordered and where repetitions are allowed
as the central sort of building blocks of our
arithmetic and our algebra. We've had some pretty
good success and we've gotten a fair way down,
but we can sort of see there's a lot further
to go. There's a lot of details and, you know,
careful structuring that's required. But at
this stage here we've introduced some really
novel elements having to do with anti-particles
or the mathematical equivalents of them. And so
it's time, I think, to sit back and to look at
what we've already done and to try to reframe it.
When we're developing mathematics, it's
important to not always just be at the forefront,
but also to occasionally go back to what we've
done earlier, you know, and try to understand,
well, what's really, what have we done here, and
have we done it in an optimal way considering how
the thing is unfolding as we're proceeding. So
oftentimes the initial definitions or notation
or whatever that we create aren't really optimal,
but that only becomes apparent sort of further on
down the road. And we have to be prepared to have
this sort of reevaluation possibility. That's
what we're going to do today. So it's not a very
long lecture; there's only two slides. So first,
I'm going to just review what sort of more or less
we've been doing and then we're going to introduce
box arithmetic. Okay, so we've introduced
arithmetic via msets, and starting with zero, the
empty mset is just a box, say, with nothing in it.
Now typically I've been writing things in a linear
fashion, but that's more or less sort of just
in accord with our usual way of writing things.
For today's talk, it'll be a little bit
better if we move to this more obviously
two-dimensional approach where the box aspect
of things becomes more apparent. So once we
have zero, then we define a natural
number to be simply an mset of zeros,
a collection of zeros. So in other words, empty
boxes which are unordered and which, of course,
repetitions are allowed. So this, for example,
is how we think about the usual number two.
Then we go down one step, we define poly
numbers. A poly number is an mset of
natural numbers. So here is an mset, the big
box, and inside it there's a natural number,
and this is also a natural number because it's
a sort of a special case of this one here.
So we end up with this family of nested objects
in mathematics, usually called a sort of filtered
object as opposed to a graded object. So at every
stage, the new things that we're invoking include
already the previously defined things. So
at the next stage we define multi numbers,
which are msets of poly numbers. So here's
an example of a multi number. This thing here
you can see is the poly number that we've
just defined, and here are a few others.
So in the usual way that I'm sort of wanting to
link things up with ordinary polynomial algebra,
this was corresponding to 1 plus Alpha
squared. This is corresponding to one here,
and this one here to Alpha squared. And this
thing here, well, a little bit of thought and
familiarity with what we've done will show you
that this is equal to 2 plus Alpha 0 plus Alpha
zero Alpha two. Now in going from here to here,
what I've done is I've sort of introduced, again,
some new notation which isn't really necessary
at this stage, but when you go to this stage,
it does become necessary. So we're going
to rewrite this as 1 plus Alpha 0 squared.
So just in the world of poly numbers this
is sort of extraneous and unnecessary,
but when we move to multi numbers, where we
get more variables with different indices,
then the ordinary Alpha gets replaced with Alpha
zero. Okay, then we can keep going. This is sort
of an obvious inductive or recursive approach
to this thing. And in terms of operations,
everything comes down to the unique operation of
addition of msets, which is a unique thing that in
the world of data structures the msets have that
the other data objects don't have: the ability
just to dump everything out into a box, thereby
adding not just two but an arbitrary number
of msets to get another mset. So for example,
here's an mset, here's an mset. When we add them,
we just dump the contents into another box, and
we get that thing there. Then multiplication is
defined in terms of addition. So a times b, if
a and b are msets in this world, is defined as
the mset of things in the form a plus b. We
look at all possible sums a from a, b from b,
and form an mset. And then that's sort of the
pattern that carries on. The next operation, say
caret, is defined in terms of this way: if C and
D are msets, then C caret D is the mset consisting
of all products c times d where little c belongs
to capital C and little d belongs to capital D.
And obviously we can sort of keep going. So the
whole thing is set up so that recursion or sort
of inductive approach is really natural; it
just unfolds in front of us. But admittedly
our intuition for what happens sort of at these
lower levels is at this stage pretty minimal.
But if we just sort of stick to multiplication,
or maybe a caret also, then we, and down, say,
down to this level here, then we recover quite
a lot of ordinary arithmetic or algebra. But
crucially up to this stage only with natural
number coefficients. If we want to have negative
number coefficients, well, then that's what
we did next. We introduced negatives, and the
crucial thing there was that it was almost forced
upon us to start thinking in terms of particles
and anti-particles the way the physicists do. So
there's an electron, maybe, and here's a positron,
anti-particles. Okay, so this notion from physics
ends up being intimately involved when we start
constructing negative numbers and investigating
their role. And what I want to do today is I
want to bring this particle anti-particle
or mset anti-mset duality to the fore.
I don't want us to just introduce this at some
later stage; I want to now go back and incorporate
this right from the beginning. Okay, so I think
this is a key difference between this system and
all prior systems of arithmetic, and I think
we need to sort of centrally position things
so that we can see this duality and, you know,
try to understand this duality very prominently.
So that's what we're going to do now: we're
going to introduce box arithmetic. Okay,
so how are we going to do this? How are we going
to introduce box arithmetic? Well, what we want to
do is we want to go back and we want to introduce
anti-msets and negatives as an essential part of
the whole story from the start. And I propose that
we're going to do that by thinking about boxes and
anti-boxes. So we're going to move away a little
bit from this idea that everything is written on
a line with lots of brackets, nested brackets, all
kinds of them, and think more about representing
the arithmetical structures in a two-dimensional
fashion. And we'll have a box approach,
but there will also be a tree approach that's
completely equivalent, so it's sort of a matter
of taste or a matter of visual orientation, or
maybe, you know, if you're a computer scientist
you're naturally going to be led to want to think
about things in terms of trees, and that's fine.
Okay, so boxes and anti-boxes: we're going
to proceed in a parallel way to what I've
just described but now starting with this
duality first and foremost. So to begin with,
we're going to want to consider just empty
boxes. And the crucial thing is that our empty
boxes are now of two kinds: there's black ones
and there's red ones. The black ones you should
think of as being like the ordinary ones that
we've already been talking about, and the red
ones are some new ones which are considered
to be the anti-objects of the black ones.
And then what we do is we put these boxes or
anti-boxes inside other boxes and anti-boxes
exactly the way we've been doing previously,
but we're allowed to at any stage use either
red boxes or black boxes, so we're mixing these
two things. And the fundamental duality between
them is represented by these two examples. So have
a look. Here we have a black box, and inside it we
have this black box with a red box inside it and
two red boxes separately. And over here we have
a red box with exactly the same stuff inside it.
Okay, so these are the same, these are the same,
so these two boxes or anti-boxes are
exactly the same except that the bounding,
the outside boxes are different colors. So we're
gonna say that they are dual in this sense, or
they are antis of each other. So if this thing is
X, then this is going to be X super a, or anti-X.
Now, another way of representing that
with a tree approach is that we're now
going to use trees whose vertices are
either black or red, corresponding here,
right? So this outside box here is represented
by that black dot there, and then inside it
there is a red box represented by that red
node and another red box represented by that
red node. There's also a black box represented
by that black node, and inside that one there's
a red box represented by that red node. And
over here, well, it's the same story. They're
really exactly the same except for the top,
the top node is now here red instead of black.
And I've also allowed myself this freedom
that we are, we're giving ourselves that
the trees are unordered so, you know, we can
move these various ingredients around because
of the unordered aspect of the msets that we're
considering. So we can also write this thing here,
for example, if we wanted to. This is really
the same as we could make it like this:
foreign
Okay, that makes the equality or the duality
between this one and this one more obvious,
but it's not necessary. So, you know,
but this thing here and this thing here
are just different because of the top, the
entry, the top node being a different color.
Okay, so now the crucial property between, um,
with these black and red things and then their
anti-aspect is that they disappear, they mutually
annihilate each other if they're found in the
same mbox. So the, so the crucial fact here is
that if we have a box or an anti-box with, uh,
with the X in it, okay, X and XA in it all
together, then they cancel, and we just get
an empty box. And that's the same if we have
an anti-box with an X and an X anti in it,
we also just end up getting cancellation,
and we get we get another red anti-box. Okay,
so that's the crucial aspect that we have this,
this duality, but these things cancel out.
And let's have a look at this thing here. So how
do we interpret this? Well, the two red boxes is
like a minus two, because if we rub this thing
off and just consider a black box with two red
boxes inside it, then that, if we added it to a
black box with two black boxes inside it, then
we would get a total with two black boxes and two
red boxes inside, and they would all cancel, we
would just get the empty box, which is like zero.
So this is like minus two just with those two red
boxes inside. And what if we just had this black
box with a red box inside it? Well, that would be
Alpha, our basic, you know, poly number
variable, Alpha to the minus one. Because
if we multiply that by a similar thing
with, with a black thing inside there,
in other words, a black box with another black box
with another black box inside it, that's Alpha,
we multiply that with Alpha, then the the inner
boxes have to be added, okay, the inner boxes have
to be added. And that means that when we add them,
the red and the black ones are going to cancel,
we're just going to get an empty box. So the
result of multiplying those two things would
be a black box with a single black box inside it,
which is the number one. Okay, so that's why this
thing here, just by itself, would be Alpha
to the minus one. So this whole thing here,
uh, in our world, that would be minus
two plus Alpha to the minus one.
Now, what about this thing here? What is its
meaning? Well, as as an object in the mathematical
universe currently, this is an unknown object.
We have not seen this kind of thing before.
It's like, you know, if I get the positron, okay,
1930s or maybe 1940, the positron was observed.
But before that, you know, there weren't any
positrons as far as people could tell. So this
thing here, I mean, what we could say is that
what it is is the anti of this. So we can say
it's minus 2 plus Alpha inverse, okay, anti, but
what the meaning of that is is not entirely clear.
So what ends up happening is that when you put
these red boxes inside a black box, so in other
words, if you consider a box with possibly
red boxes inside it or anti-boxes inside it,
perhaps under, you know, deep down in different
levels, then that kind of thing can still end
up being represented in principle by a somewhat
of an elementary or familiar object, at least,
you know, down to the level of multi numbers.
So beyond that, we haven't much experience.
So the red boxes, or the the anti-boxes, are
useful in the sense that they are important
constituents in the world of box arithmetic,
but just by themselves they have a kind of a
strange ephemeral nature, maybe like, like
quarks, you know, that they make sense when
they're constrained in in in a nucleus or
something, but, um, just isolated quarks we
don't really see them in nature, they don't
seem to play a role. So while there is this
symmetry, box anti-box symmetry, there's also a
separation in our minds. So we we also want to
perhaps ultimately be more interested in
the arithmetic on this side and think of the
the anti-boxes as sort of objects which contribute
to the richness of the arithmetic over here,
but by themselves maybe have an ephemeral nature.
So I realize this is all rather sort of, you know,
strange, maybe it's like voodoo, but I hope you've
been convinced by my previous videos that we're
on to something here, that we really are touching
base with ordinary mathematical reality, but
we're just looking at it in a very different way,
and we're sort of enshrining that very different
way here. We're not putting that under the carpet;
we want to really put it center stage
and look at the consequences. Okay,
so that's what we're going to do. We're going
to be looking at thinking about box arithmetic
being developed in a sort of consistent
way so that this duality is sort of
almost always omnipresent, and that
this sort of what we might call a box,
this thing here, this phenomenon here, we might
call this box anti-box creation/annihilation.
So for example, what that means is that when we
we look at something like this thing here, okay,
we could we could change this, seemingly change
it but actually not do anything real to it. So
if we put in in this, say, one of these red boxes,
if we put inside there a red one and a black one,
then the effect is to not change it, we have not
changed it. So that means, and that's that's true
even over on this side, you know, whenever
we put in two objects, boxes or anti-boxes,
inside a single constituent, but they're identical
except that their top nodes are different colors,
then those two things will annihilate, and
so they are able to be presented this way.
So the kind of shimmering reality that the quantum
physicists like to talk about, where we have these
fields, and these fields have all these emergent
pairs of little particles, you know, that are
being quickly created and then annihilated and
they appear and then they disappear, you know,
just for a split second, you know, and so
this is some kind of really strange thing
that that's how they think. What we're seeing is
something parallel to that here in this world,
that we're able to create these box anti-box
pairs and then they're annihilated a second later.
So if this is really strange, think about it
the following way, which which makes it maybe
more familiar. So when you're doing ordinary
arithmetic with fractions, say three over five,
okay, you all know that you can replace that by
multiplying top and bottom by whatever we want,
say like by two. So three over five is the same
as six over ten. So what have we done there? Well,
we've introduced a new factor on the top and the
bottom. The two factors happen to be the same,
but they're in different places, so they're
playing different roles, sort of like this
red dot and this black dot. They're sort of the
same except that they're different because one's
red and one's black. And correspondingly, you
know, one of the twos is in the numerator, one
of the twos is in the denominator, and so you can
take three fifths and if you like you can quickly
change it to six over ten, or you can multiply it
by three and get 9 over 15. Right, you're doing it
something very similar. You're creating something
more complicated by adding some more factors,
but in these two different ways which are sort of
balanced, so they're sort of kind of a duality.
So it's actually not that
unfamiliar from some point of view.
Okay, so now I think with this sort
of general orientation I think we
can now go back to the development that
we've already had in terms of zeros and
natural numbers and poly numbers and multi
numbers and sort of redo all those things,
but just starting with the box anti-box point of
view. So we just carry on down, and it's I think
an interesting exercise, and we're going to
have to look very carefully at that because
we've seen that these particle anti-particle
things have some curious, maybe even disturbing,
properties when we are doing basic arithmetic just
with, say, the zero box and the anti-zero box.
So it might be that when we restrict
ourselves to just boxed arithmetic,
that those curious aspects are hidden
from sight. In fact, that's sort of what
I'm thinking will happen, that those sort of
anomalous kind of things that we're seeing are
are not really visible parts of the mathematical
or arithmetical world that we're going to create.
We're ultimately going to be interested in
box arithmetic, but we want to have this
symmetry because these guys are going
to be crucial ingredients in the boxes.
So that's a lot of fun. Maybe some of you would
like to, you know, try that out yourself and
see how far you get in terms of building up
a consistent theory. Ultimately, we want very
careful definitions and theorems and proofs, etc.
But, you know, exactly how we're going to do that,
that may be still some ways away. I'm Norman
Walberger, thanks for listening. [Music]